Difference between HTTP1.1 vs HTTP2

Introduction

The Hypertext Transfer Protocol, or HTTP, is an application protocol that has been the de facto standard for communication on the World Wide Web since its invention in 1989. 
From the release of HTTP/1.1 in 1997 until recently, there have been few revisions to the protocol. 

But in 2015, a reimagined version called HTTP/2 came into use, which offered several methods to decrease latency, especially when dealing with mobile platforms and server-intensive graphics and videos.

Background

To contextualize the specific changes that HTTP/2 made to HTTP/1.1, let’s first take a high-level look at the historical development and basic workings of each.

Key Features HTTP/1.1

It supports connection reuse i.e. for every TCP connection there could be multiple requests and responses, and pipelining where the client can request several resources from the server at once.
However, pipelining was hard to implement due to issues such as head-of-line blocking and was not a feasible solution.


Key Features HTTP/2

Uses multiplexing, where over a single TCP connection resources to be delivered are interleaved and arrive at the client almost at the same time.
It is done using streams which can be prioritized, can have dependencies and individual flow control. It also provides a feature called server push that allows the server to send data that the client will need but has not yet requested.


Status Code HTTP/1.1

Introduces a warning header field to carry additional information about the status of a message. Can define 24 status codes, error reporting is quicker and more efficient.

Status Code HTTP/2

Underlying semantics of HTTP such as headers, status codes remains the same.


Authentication Mechanism HTTP/1.1

It is relatively secure since it uses digest authentication, NTLM authentication.

Authentication Mechanism HTTP/2

Security concerns from previous versions will continue to be seen in HTTP/2. However, it is better equipped to deal with them due to new TLS features like connection error of type Inadequate_Security.

		
Caching HTTP/1.1

Expands on the caching support by using additional headers like cache-control, conditional headers like If-Match and by using entity tags.	


Caching HTTP/2

HTTP/2 does not change much in terms of caching. With the server push feature if the client finds the resources are already present in the cache, it can cancel the pushed stream.


Web Traffic HTTP/1.1

HTTP/1.1 provides faster delivery of web pages and reduces web traffic as compared to HTTP/1.0. However, TCP starts slowly and with domain sharding (resources can be downloaded simultaneously by using multiple domains), connection reuse and pipelining, there is an increased risk of network congestion.	

Web Traffic HTTP/2

HTTP/2 utilizes multiplexing and server push to effectively reduce the page load time by a greater margin along with being less sensitive to network delays.
